create grts for utm1 raster (#1)
inbo/soortenmeetnetten-design: grts_utm1/source/draw_grts_sample.Rmd

---
title: "GRTS sample for UTM 1 km x 1 km raster"
author: "Toon Westra"
output:
  bookdown::html_document2:
    toc: TRUE
    toc_depth: 2
    toc_float:
      collapsed: FALSE
      smooth_scroll: FALSE
    number_sections: TRUE
date: "2023-04-24"
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
```

```{r, warning = FALSE}
library(tidyverse)
library(sf)
library(n2khab)
library(conflicted)
library(grtsdb)
library(leaflet)
conflicts_prefer(dplyr::filter())
```

# UTM 1 km x 1 km raster covering Flanders 

We make use of following data sources:

> + The shapefile `utm1.shp` that can found in this folder on the INBO cirtrix server `S:\Vlaanderen\Locatie\UTMroosters`. 

Reviewer: Try to replace it with a public version.

Reviewer 2: One (less future-proof, rather quick-and-dirty) method is to copy it to a public Google Drive location, and add code (see **googledrive** package) to download the file from there.

But much better to get it published at Zenodo, with good documentation of what it represents (!) or how it was created.

Best also investigate the background of the used source. A polygon layer derived from grid lines in some other UTM CRS and reprojected to EPSG:31370 does not feel 'original'. It may be possible to just reproduce it from a definition, hence not needing this shapefile. And transformation to EPSG:31370 _within the data source_ would not be needed then.

> It contains the UTM 1 km x 1 km raster covering Belgium. 

Reviewer 2: Word choice: 'the UTM 1 km x 1 km raster' is not represented here as a 'raster' (no raster cells), but as grid polygons defined by the grid lines of some CRS.

This shapefile has to be copied in the data folder of this R project. 

> + The shapefile with the borders of Flanders that can be found on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/3386224#.ZEaQC3ZBygY).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ The shapefile with the borders of Flanders that can be found on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3386224).
```

> When you put this file in the following folder `C:\n2khab_data\10_raw\flanders` it can be read in R using the function `read_admin_areas` of the `n2khab` package. 

Reviewer: Don't use absolute paths.

```{r}
utm1 <- read_sf("../data/utm1.shp")  %>%
  st_transform(31370)

flanders <- read_admin_areas(dsn = "flanders")

utm1_flanders <- utm1 %>%
  st_join(flanders) %>%
  filter(name == "Vlaams Gewest")

utm1_flanders_centroid <- utm1_flanders %>%
  st_centroid()
```
We cobine both dataset by selecting all UTM1 raster cells that overlap with Flanders.

The figure below shows the centroid of all selected UTM1 raster cells.

```{r}
utm1_flanders_centroid %>%
  ggplot() +
  geom_sf(data = flanders) +
  geom_sf(alpha = 0.1)
```

# GRTS sample

We use the `grtsdb` package to create a grts sample with a bounding box corresponding to the UTM 1 km x 1 km raster covering Flanders and with a cell size of 1 km.

```{r}

> db <- connect_db()

Reviewer: Store the grts database too. That is useful in case you need nested samples with a different resolution.

      smooth_scroll: FALSE
    number_sections: TRUE
date: "2023-05-03"
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
```

```{r}

library(tidyverse)
library(sf)
library(giscoR)
library(grtsdb)
library(terra)
library(leaflet)
library(conflicted)

conflicts_prefer(dplyr::filter())

# ISO8601 timestamp to set as fixed value in the GeoPackage 
# (to be UPDATED to the actual creation date; at least update for each version):
Sys.setenv(OGR_CURRENT_DATE = "2023-05-03T00:00:00.000Z")
# This is used to keep results reproducible, as the timestamp is otherwise
# updated each time.
# Above environment variable OGR_CURRENT_DATE is used by the GDAL driver.
# The time precision (milliseconds) & timezone (UTC, denoted by 'Z') is
# needed to meet Requirement 15 of the GeoPackage standard (version 1.2.1 & 1.3).
```

# UTM 1 km grid covering Belgium

The UTM 1km grid consists of grid cells of 1 km x 1 km. The coordinate reference system (CRS) is ETRS89-LAEA Europe (epsg=3035). 
The xy-coordinates of the grid cells corners are always a multitude of 1000 meters.
Each grid cell has a unique code based on the coordinates of the lower left corner of the grid cell.

> For example if the distance from the lower left corner of a grid cell to the origin is 3773000 meter East and 3043000 meter North, the code is `1kmE3773N3043`.

Reviewer 2: You are describing the [EEA reference grid](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/eea-reference-grids-2), which has no straightforward relations with the 'UTM grid'. I am in the process of gathering more background on and tools for the MGRS (Military Grid Reference System), which we are dealing with here. I will come back to this. A good reading on this is provided by https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military_Grid_Reference_System.

For going forward, I recommend to:

1. work in CRS: EPSG:25831 (ETRS89 / UTM zone 31N)
2. check that the 1 km grid lines of its coordinate system (CS) align well with the utm1 shapefile borders (it should insofar the metadata of that shapefile is correct). So this requires (back-) transformation of the shapefile to EPSG:25831. The shapefile is just for checking locally, it's not needed in the Rmd.
3. Supposing that step 2 is successful (if not, try using EPSG:32631), define the raster based on the 1 km grid lines of the CS (or at least just using integers if you want to go smaller; the CS unit is meters and MGRS can go as deep as the m²). For Flanders this approach will (should) match the MGRS (utm grid), although for the buffer you must not grow bigger than 6 km because 6 km east of Voerstreek lies the border of UTM zone 31.

Reviewer 2: > 2. check that the 1 km grid lines of its coordinate system (CS) align well with the utm1 shapefile borders (it should insofar the metadata of that shapefile is correct). So this requires (back-) transformation of the shapefile to EPSG:25831

I have done this in QGIS while exploring some other layers.

- The 'utm1' layer was created in geodetic datum WGS 84 before transforming to Belgian Lambert 72. As expected the polygon borders have a ± exact match with the gridlines of EPSG:32631, after back-transformation (within a few cm = inaccuracies introduced by the current vs. older transformations, and back- vs forth transforming).
- The same holds for the 'utm1_ETRS89' layer (created in geodetic datum ETRS89), when matching with the gridlines of **EPSG:25831**. So that CRS is definitely the best one to go with (it's plate-fixed, contrary to the WGS 84 datum).

More important still, the match between the gridlines of **EPSG:25831** and the (reprojected) polygon borders of an official MGRS dataset from NGA (www.nga.mil) is even closer (E-W only 2.8e-5 m, N-S about 1.5 cm).

So for step 3 you can work in EPSG:25831.

Reviewer 2: A tentative synthesis with more background on the MGRS is in the making. You can read its current state at https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/blob/mgrs/content/articles/spatial_mgrs/index.md. Still missing are images and bibliographic references, which will be added at a later stage.

---
title: "GRTS master sample for MGRS 1 km x 1 km grid covering Belgium and Flanders"
author: "Toon Westra"
output:
  bookdown::html_document2:
    toc: TRUE
    toc_depth: 2
    toc_float:
      collapsed: FALSE
      smooth_scroll: FALSE
    number_sections: TRUE
date: "2023-05-03"
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
```

```{r}
#remotes::install_github("hrbrmstr/mgrs")
library(tidyverse)
library(sf)
library(giscoR)
library(grtsdb)
library(terra)
library(leaflet)
library(mgrs)
library(conflicted)

conflicts_prefer(dplyr::filter())

# ISO8601 timestamp to set as fixed value in the GeoPackage 
# (to be UPDATED to the actual creation date; at least update for each version):
Sys.setenv(OGR_CURRENT_DATE = "2023-05-03T00:00:00.000Z")
# This is used to keep results reproducible, as the timestamp is otherwise
# updated each time.
# Above environment variable OGR_CURRENT_DATE is used by the GDAL driver.
# The time precision (milliseconds) & timezone (UTC, denoted by 'Z') is
# needed to meet Requirement 15 of the GeoPackage standard (version 1.2.1 & 1.3).
```

# MGRS 1 km grid

## Background

> The Military Grid Reference System (MGRS), sometimes called the ‘UTM grid’, is often used to define grid cells with a certain dimension (for example 1 km x 1 km) in biodiversity monitoring. Background information can be found [here](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/blob/mgrs/content/articles/spatial_mgrs/index.md).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Military Grid Reference System (MGRS), sometimes called the ‘UTM grid’, is often used to define grid cells with a certain dimension (for example 1 km x 1 km) in biodiversity monitoring. Background information can be found [here](https://inbo.github.io/tutorials/articles/spatial_mgrs).  
```

The `mgrs` branch will be gone after merging (of course, the link will only work _after_ merging).

## Create MGRS 1 km grid covering Belgium

We create a MGRS 1km grid covering Belgium as follows:

+ load sf object of Belgium using the `giscoR` package (Hernangomez, 2023)
+ transform it to `crs = 25831`
+ take a buffer of 5 km
+ derive the bounding box
+ round the bounding box to a multitude of 1000

```{r}

belgium <- gisco_get_nuts(nuts_level = 2, country = "Belgium", resolution = "01") %>%
  st_transform(crs = 25831)

flanders <- belgium %>%
  filter(NUTS_NAME %in% c("Prov. Antwerpen", 
                          "Prov. Oost-Vlaanderen", 
                          "Prov. West-Vlaanderen", 
                          "Prov. Vlaams-Brabant", 
                          "Prov. Limburg (BE)"))

belgium_buffer <- belgium  %>%
  st_buffer(dist = 5000)

bbox_belgium_buffer <- st_bbox(belgium_buffer)

xmin <- floor(bbox_belgium_buffer$xmin/1000)*1000
ymin <- floor(bbox_belgium_buffer$ymin/1000)*1000
xmax <- ceiling(bbox_belgium_buffer$xmax/1000)*1000
ymax <- ceiling(bbox_belgium_buffer$ymax/1000)*1000

xmin <- xmin - 1000
ymin <- ymin - 1000

x_res <- (xmax - xmin) / 1000

> y_res <- (ymax - ymin) / 1000

Reviewer 2: Unclear (so far) what this code is for.

Author: I added documentation

```

# GRTS sample

We use the `grtsdb` package to create a grts sample with the bounding box created above and a cell size of 1 km.

```{r}

db <- connect_db()

bbox <- rbind(
  x = c(xmin, xmax),
  y = c(ymin, ymax)
)
  
cellsize <- 1000

add_level(bbox = bbox, cellsize = cellsize, grtsdb = db)
 
```
Next we convert the result to a raster, a point shapefile and a polygon shapefile and crop it to the extent of Belgium and Flanders.
We use the R package `mgrs` (Rudis, 2022) to convert xy-coordinates of the SW-corner of a 1km grid cell to the mgrs coordinate at 1 km resolution.

```{r}
sample <- extract_sample(
  grtsdb = db, samplesize = 100000, bbox = bbox, cellsize = cellsize
)

> sample_utm <- sample %>%

Reviewer 2: `sample_mgrs` would be a better name; same for following objects (`sample` already uses a UTM CRS)

Author: ok

  rowwise() %>%
  mutate(cellcode = utm_to_mgrs(zone = 31,hemisphere =  "N",easting =   x1c, northing =  x2c, precision = 2))

belgium_buffer_vector_terra <- vect(belgium_buffer)

sample_utm_raster <- sample_utm %>%
  select(x = x1c, y = x2c, ranking) %>%

>   rast(type = "xyz", crs = crs(belgium_buffer_vector_terra))

Reviewer 2: Here I think the raster is shifting compared to the intended grid, by 0.5 km. That is, I presume that the coordinates provided by `grtsdb::extract_sample()` are coordinates that correspond to the UTM 1 km grid line intersections, not the centers of the grid cells defined by those grid lines.

Reviewer 2: So if that is true, the creation of points (meant to be grid cell centroids) and polygons (meant to match grid lines) also needs revisiting.

Author: `grtsdb::extract_sample()` gives the coordinates of the center of grid cells. I added an aditional check to be sure.

sample_utm_points_sf <- sample_utm %>%
  st_as_sf(coords = c("x1c", "x2c"), crs = 25831)

sample_utm_polygons_sf <- sample_utm %>%
  mutate(geom = str_c("POLYGON ((", x1c - 500, " ", x2c - 500, 
                                ",", x1c + 500, " ", x2c - 500,
                                ",", x1c + 500, " ", x2c + 500,
                                ",", x1c - 500, " ", x2c + 500,
                                ",", x1c - 500, " ", x2c - 500, "))")) %>%
  st_as_sf(wkt = "geom", crs = 25831)

```

```{r}

belgium_buffer_2000 <- belgium %>%
  group_by(CNTR_CODE) %>%
  summarise(level = "Belgium") %>%
  ungroup() %>%
  st_buffer(2000) %>%
  select(level)

> grts_utm1_belgium_polygons <- sample_utm_polygons_sf %>%

Reviewer 2: also here best replace 'utm' in the names with 'mgrs'
